Versloot, Arjen P. "Traces of a North Sea Germanic Idiom in the
Fifth-Seventh Centuries AD." In: Frisians of the Early Middle Ages,
ed. John Hines and Nelleke IJssennagger-van der Pluijm.
Woodbridge: Boydell & Brewer, 2021, 339-374.
doi:10.1017/9781800101326.012

SOURCE AND METHOD
-----------------
Born-digital PDF with a reliable embedded text layer; extracted with
`pdftotext -layout` (poppler). No OCR was involved, so no OCR caveat
applies: the characters below are the publisher's own, not a recognition
guess. The PDF itself stays untracked under docs/references/ per
.gitignore; this text is the committed, citable representation.

PAGE NUMBERING
--------------
The `=== page NNN ===` markers below are the PRINTED page numbers of the
publication, not PDF sheet numbers, so a citation taken from this file can
be given directly as a page reference. The offset is constant: printed
page N is PDF sheet N - 338. It was verified mechanically: the printed
folio appears in the running head or foot of 34 of the 36 sheets,
and each of the 2 sheet(s) that does not show its own
folio was inspected individually and has a reason unrelated to
the offset:
  p. 352 -- full-page fig., no running head
  p. 374 -- blank
Text never crosses a printed page boundary.

Printed pages 339-374 (36 sheets).

--------------------------------------------------------------------------

=== page 339 ===
                                          • 12 •

          TRACES OF A NORTH SEA GERMANIC IDIOM
           IN THE FIFTH–SEVENTH CENTURIES AD

                                   Arjen P. Versloot




T
       he concept of ‘Anglo-Frisian’ as a common branch on the Germanic lan-
       guage tree was coined in the nineteenth century and appears prominently in
       the title of Theodor Siebs’s (1889) dissertation Zur Geschichte der Englisch-frie-
sischen Sprache (see also Nielsen 1985; Stiles 1995; Hines 2017). Nevertheless, people
were already aware of the similarity between Frisian and English much earlier, per-
haps even as early as the time of the Anglo-Saxon mission in Frisia in the seventh and
eighth centuries. In the late sixteenth century, the language of parts of North-Holland
is described as Half Vries, half Engels by woorden ghebroken [‘Half Frisian, half English
with broken words’] (Valcooch 1599, fol. A7r), Franciscus Junius, who was an early Old
English philologist, visited Friesland in 1646–8 to learn Frisian and study Old Frisian.
The Tegenwoordige Staat der Vereenigde Nederlanden [‘The current state of the United
Netherlands’] (Schouten et al. 1785), describing Friesland, contains a West Frisian text
with a parallel English translation to exhibit the similarities between the languages.
    Examples of English-Frisian parallels are easy to find, well known and seemingly
convincing. Some older place-names and dialectal words in traditional western Dutch
dialects attest to the earlier existence of some form of Anglo-Frisian far beyond the
present-day western border of the province of Fryslân (Tab. 12.1).

 Table 12.1 Examples of similarities between North Sea Germanic language varieties.
German       Dutch       English     Frisian (West)            Western Dutch dialects
Gans         gans        goose       goes                      Goes (place-name)
brachte      bracht      brought     brocht                    brocht
Brücke       brug        bridge      brêge, brich              breg, brigge
ab           af          of          ôf                        of


   This paper addresses the following issues. The first part is concerned with the con-
cept of Anglo-Frisian and how it has been critiqued, and subsequently presents a new
understanding of the concept. This is made possible by various new results from his-
torical linguistics, including a new interpretation of the early phonological history of
English (Versloot forthcoming a; forthcoming b); a close scrutiny of the North Sea
Germanic traces in western Dutch (De Vaan 2017); fuller understanding of the early

                                            339

=== page 340 ===
                            Frisians of the Early Middle Ages

history of Frisian (Versloot 2014a; Versloot and de Vaan, in prep.); and better access to
the dialectal nuances of Old Saxon (Tiefenbach 2010; Versloot and Adamczyk 2017).
The second part aims at establishing a link between the linguistic and the archaeologi-
cal evidence. Special emphasis is put on the spatial organization of the linguistic traces
and the actual speakers of these idioms by an analysis of the geographical patterns in
the distribution of runic inscriptions, place-names commonly linked to the migration
of populations in the Early Middle Ages, and some archaeological artefacts associated
with the early Frisians and Anglo-Saxons.

                           The Anglo-Frisian hypothesis

The deconstruction of the Anglo-Frisian hypothesis
The ‘old-school’ mode of reasoning about North Sea Germanic (including Anglo-Fri-
sian commonalities) finds its climax in Schwarz’s (1951) Goten, Nordgermanen,
Angelsachsen, where various Stämme/Völker (‘tribes/peoples’) with apparently clearly
distinguishable ethnic and linguistic profiles move around, and ad hoc and in a fairly
eclectic way exchange linguistic traits and features. Schwarz is very explicit about the
origins of Anglofriesisch: ‘Es wird mit Recht geschlossen, daß die gemeinsamen Züge
des Fries. und Ae. bereits auf dem Festlande ausgebildet waren.’ [It will be correctly
concluded that the common traits of Frisian and Anglo-Saxon had been established
already on the Continent.].
   The Anglo-Frisian hypothesis of a common idiom that was taken to England by the
Germanic invaders was severely criticized in Kuhn’s (1955) seminal article, which was
in fact an expanded review of Schwarz’s book. He introduced a contrasting scheme,
arguing for a fairly undifferentiated North-West Germanic language prior to the move-
ments of the Migration Period. As in many other instances, ideas that later become
mainstream can often be found long before that time. Chadwick’s (1889) account of
events is entirely in line with Kuhn’s approach. Chadwick wrote (1889, 264):
  In saying that none of the existing distinctions between Scandinavian, Anglo-Frisian
  and West Germanic go back to a period much before the beginning of the fifth cen-
  tury I do not mean that before that time dialectical differences were entirely wanting.
  Considering the size of the area over which these languages are (and were even at
  that time) distributed, this would be improbable. I mean rather that the divisions and
  dialects, which existed before that time, were probably different from those which
  appear later. The political events of the fourth and fifth centuries involved a general
  dislocation of the Germanic world; new groups were formed and old differences
  would naturally often be obliterated.
The relationship among and differentiation of the Germanic languages has been care-
fully analysed in work by Nielsen (1985; 1998; 2000; 2010), revealing a nuanced picture
of various early changes, gradually deploying into the differentiation between North
Germanic, North Sea West Germanic and Continental West Germanic, before, during
and after the landnam of England (adventus Saxonum). A view of this delicate and
complicated process, without sharp boundaries, but largely taking place in a language
continuum, where different changes spread over smaller or larger areas, was also devel-
oped in Stiles (2013). Most of the ‘classical’ North Sea Germanic features fall in the

                                           340

=== page 341 ===
                                        North Sea Germanic Idiom

period during and after the landnam. Little to nothing is left of an Anglo-Frisian idiom
on the Continent prior to the year 400.
    Instead of a pre-landnam Anglo-Frisian on the Continent, Kuhn and others suggest
the development of a common language in the period during and after c. 400, where
Frisian and English, with the inclusion of the Dutch coastal region (see Tab. 12.1), largely
developed in a parallel vein for the next two centuries. But this version of Anglo-Frisian
is nowadays mostly discarded as well. To quote Stiles (1995, 211):
     [T]he evidence does not support the notion of an ‘original Anglo-Frisian unity’
     or sub-protolanguage. This is because it is not possible to construct the exclusive
     common relative chronology that is necessary in order to be able to establish a node
     on a family tree.
What we end up with is a set of features that spread at different times and different pace
over varying regions around the North Sea. The reconstructed timing of the events is
often so different that nothing more than a vague common tendency is left. The lack of
similarity in the chronologies of phonological changes between English and Frisian, as
mentioned by Stiles, is illustrated in Table 12.2.


 Table 12.2 Selected ‘Anglo-Frisian’ sound changes and their relative chronological
 ordering in English and Frisian according to the current conventional understanding.
 Sound changes in Old English                   Old English        Sound changes in Old Frisian
                                                dialects
 1. Raising of /æ:/ > /e:/                      Mc, Nh
 2. Rounding */a(:)/ > /ɔ(:)/                   [WS], Mc, Ke,      Rounding */a(:)/ > /ɔ(:)/
                                                Nh
 3. Monophthongization of */ai/                 Mc, WS, Ke, Nh
 4. Fronting */a/                               Mc, WS, Ke, Nh     Fronting */a/ - restricted
 5. Breaking: /i(:), e(:), æ(:)/ > io, eo, ea   WS, Mc, Ke, Nh     Monophthongization of */ai/
                                                                   - restricted
 6. Combinative ‘breaking’ /æ/ > /a/            Mc, Nh             12. Monophthongization of */au/
 7. Restoration of /a/                          WS, Mc, Ke, Nh
 8. Restoration of /a:/ (partly)                WS
 9. Palatal diphthongization: /e(:), æ(:)/      WS, Nh
 > ie, ea
 10. i-Mutation                                 WS, Mc, Ke, Nh     i-Mutation
 11. Smoothing <io, eo, ea> > <i, e, æ>         Mc, Nh             13. Labial mutation and breaking
                                                                   Raising of /æ:/ > /e:/
 Abbreviations
 -


 Ke = Kentish, Mc = Mercian, Nh = Northumbrian, WS = West Saxon
 -


 Examples OE/OFris: 1. rēd/rēd ‘advice’; 2. mōnað/mōnath ‘month’; 3. clāþ/clāth ‘cloth’; 4. þæt/thet
 ‘that’; 5. weorc,seax/werk,sax ‘work,knife’; 6. barna/berna ‘children’ (gen.pl.); 7. dagas/*dagar ‘days’;
 8. māgas/mēgan ‘kinsmen’; 9. scēap/skēp ‘sheep’; 10. dēman, doeman/dēma ‘to judge’; 11. (cf. 5.)
 werc,sæx/werk,sax ‘work,knife’; 12. rēad/rād ‘red’; 13. þicce/thiukke ‘thick’.


                                                     341

=== page 342 ===
                                 Frisians of the Early Middle Ages

   Table 12.2 illustrates that there is only a limited overlap in changes between English
and Frisian and that most of the changes that are common are allocated to different
places chronologically. The unavoidable conclusion is that, despite the similar out-
comes, these changes were not ‘common’ in terms of timing and probably then also
in terms of causation. Kortlandt (1999; 2008) suggests a common basis, with many
developments actually shared in chronology and time by English and Frisian. Some of
his ideas are reflected in the suggestions I will make but differ from it in other points.
A full discussion goes beyond this chapter but some of my arguments can be found in
Versloot (2017a, 318).

The evidence reconsidered
The archaeological evidence
The cumulative archaeological and genetic evidence (for a recent summary, see, e.g.,
Colleran 2016) points in the direction of a re-settlement of the southern North Sea
littoral (Frisia) and a landnam by speakers of Germanic languages from a common
stock of people with origins in the Elbe-Weser Triangle, the southern Jutlandic pen-
insula (including Angeln), with some further admixture of people from further north
up into Norway (Nicolay 2005; Higham and Ryan 2015, 70–125). This potentially opens
up a way back to the ‘old-school’ thinking about a common Anglo-Frisian Continental
‘tribe’, that took its language to its new homelands. However, we adhere to the lin-
guistic reconstructions of the last decades in the spirit of Chadwick, Kuhn, Nielsen
and Stiles and conclude on the basis of their research that these people spoke a fairly
undifferentiated North-West Germanic at the beginning of the fifth century. The new
dialectal configuration of post-migration Germanic may incidentally show linguistic
traces which existed already earlier in restricted parts of the Germanic continuum but
cannot be pinpointed in a one-to-one relationship to specific homelands.1
The phonological history of English
I recently suggested an extensive reform of the earliest phonological history of English
(Versloot, forthcoming a; forthcoming b). This proposal is based on an in-depth analy-
sis of the oldest Early Old English records: Cædmon’s Hymn, Bede’s Death Song (Sweet
and Whitelock 1967, 181–3), the Franks Casket (Findell 2014, 44–54), minor sources
that are traditionally linked to Northumbria, and the Épinal and Erfurt Glossaries,
comprising around 1,100 parallel tokens (Pheifer 1974). All of these sources are from
the late seventh or early eighth centuries; only the Erfurt version of the Glossaries is
usually dated somewhat later in the eighth century. Together with my analysis of the
development of Proto-Germanic *ai (Versloot 2017a) they suggest a major change to
the chronologies shown in Table 12.2.
    The pivotal issues are the place of the Old English (OE) breaking in the relative
chronology and the scope of fronting. OE breaking primarily concerns the change of
short Proto-Germanic (PGmc) *a and e into ea and eo respectively, as in OE weard,
weorc ‘guard’, ‘work’. Old Frisian (OFris) did not have this type of breaking and its

1   In a similar vein, some traits of American English can be found in dialects in Britain, but there is no
    direct relation between geographical variation in American English and specific British English dialects
    (see also Trudgill 2010).

                                                   342

=== page 343 ===
                                     North Sea Germanic Idiom

cognates of these OE words are therefore ward and werk, preserving the PGmc vowel
qualities. Anglo-Frisian fronting appears in words such as OE þæt and dæg ‘that’, ‘day’,
OFris thet, dei; cf. Dutch dat and dag, Old Norse þat and dagr. The current theory,
which can be found in, for instance, Campbell (1959) and Hogg (2011), works with a
general implementation of fronting of PGmc *a and a subsequent nearly exceptionless
breaking of vowels before *rC, *lC and *x.2 The application of these two rules would
predict, however, many more words with fronted or broken vowels than are in fact
attested in historical OE texts. To make up for the disparity, a set of additional sound
laws has been introduced (‘retraction’ and ‘smoothing’; nos. 6, 7 and 11 in Table 12.2) to
account for the actually attested forms, making the chronology of OE according to the
current theory extremely complicated and packed with contradictory and sometimes
phonologically questionable sound changes. There are clear dialectal differences in this
respect. The dialect of Wessex, commonly referred to as West Saxon, has many more
broken vowels than the dialects more to the north, commonly labelled Mercian and
Northumbrian. But even then, many actually attested forms, even in West Saxon, have
to be ‘explained’ by positing mixtures of spelling traditions, sloppy scribal practices
such as ‘scribal error(s)’ and ‘scribal confusion’, or otherwise archaic spellings at a time
when no body of writing in the vernacular existed that people could take these spell-
ings from.3
   The following sequences leading from PGmc *a to e in Old English and Old Frisian
in a similar phonological context, may serve as an example of the extra steps considered
by the current theory for Old English.
    -
Old English:         PGmc *harwian- ‘to abuse, treat with contempt’
  		                 > *hærwian (fronting)
  		                 > *hearwian (breaking)
  		                 > herwan (Anglian i-mutation)
    -

Old Frisian: PGmc arƀijō- (form attested on the third- or fourth-century Tune
		  stone, Norway) ‘heir’
  		 > erva (i-mutation by earlier -ij-)
    -

The intermediate steps posited for OE *hærw- and *hearw- do not appear in any form
of early writing. Moreover, the alleged effect of i-mutation in OE, namely *ea > e, is
phonologically illogical; the normal manifestation of i-mutation is directly from [a] >
[ɛ]. The ‘Frisian’ scenario is much easier and more straightforward: *a was fronted by
i-mutation to e and the same could be assumed for pre-OE.
   In the alternative scenario, suggested by myself and based on the relative order of
events as reconstructed in Frisian, there is an only partial fronting of PGmc *a in OE,

2   ‘C’ = any consonant; ‘x’ represents Dutch and German <ch> in reconstructed forms.
3   A typical example is the frequent occurrence of <ald> ‘old’ without breaking in sections of the West
    Saxon Parker Chronicle from the ninth century, whereas the spelling <eald> with breaking predomi-
    nates in entries describing events from the tenth century. The current theory ignores this transition in
    spelling as an indication of a change in pronunciation around the year 900 because breaking is sup-
    posed to have taken place three or four centuries earlier. Campbell (1977, §143) describes the variation
    in the chronicle only in terms of changes in ‘spelling’. Hogg (1992, §5.15) assumes that there were two
    contemporaneous dialects side by side, one with and one without breaking and that the older sections
    were written by speakers of the dialect without breaking. This equally assumes that breaking is of much
    earlier date than even the oldest sections of the chronicle.

                                                   343

=== page 344 ===
                                  Frisians of the Early Middle Ages

under nearly identical conditions as in Frisian, and a much later date for the breaking
of PGmc *a and *e. An allocation of OE breaking to the late seventh century, deploying
further in the eighth and ninth centuries both geographically and in respect of phono-
logical environments, eliminates changes 6, 7, 8 and 11 from the chronology of OE in
Table 12.2. The relative order of the remaining sound laws can subsequently be adjusted,
and their relative chronology brought into line with the Frisian chronology.
The linguistic shape of the Dutch coastal region
De Vaan (2017) offers the most comprehensive discussion of the potentially North Sea
Germanic features in the coastal dialects of Dutch. His conclusions are sobering for
the Anglo-Frisian hypothesis in that many of the features interpreted as residues of an
earlier North Sea Germanic idiom in the coastal region of the Netherlands, Belgium
and northern France can just as well or better be interpreted as local developments,
unrelated to what happened in Frisian and English. This careful scrutiny of the evi-
dence secures, at the same time, a number of features or relic words (often only in
place-names), that can be positively identified as relics of a North Sea Germanic idiom.
For the sake of this research, the latter group is of interest. De Vaan enumerates these
features and identifies them clearly (2017, 515–22). They are our only access to this vari-
ety of North Sea Germanic.4
The shape and extent of the North Sea Germanic idiom
The ‘slimmed’ OE chronology turns out to fit very well with the developments as recon-
structed for Frisian. Many of these developments are attested in relic words and place-
names in the coastal Dutch zone as well; note that almost none of them is an integral
part of the mainstream phonology of traditional coastal Dutch dialects. Many of these
developments can also be found in Old Saxon, in particular the central and eastern
varieties spoken in the river basins of the Weser and Elbe (Versloot and Adamczyk
2017).
    The evidence from those four varieties of Germanic (English, Frisian, coastal Dutch
and Old Saxon) can be combined in a ‘North Sea Germanic tick-list’ containing the
most prominent North Sea Germanic features. Table 12.3 presents this list and the
geographical scope of the various developments by mentioning which varieties par-
ticipated in which sound changes. Where necessary and reconstructable, sub-dialectal
patterns have been included.
    Table 12.3 illustrates two important features. First of all, there is a largely shared
chronology, both relative and absolute, for English and Frisian, including most of the
Dutch and Flemish coast all the way to Calais, and the North Sea-oriented varieties
of Old Saxon. This strong linkage remains intact up to i-mutation, which is a gen-
eral, widespread phenomenon in North Sea Germanic, as opposed to the restricted
‘primary i-mutation’ of short PGmc *a in the Continental West Germanic varieties
(Salmons 2018, 130–1). i-mutation is dated around the year 600 for English, perhaps
with a slight delay in Frisian, and has a much more restricted application in Old Saxon.

4   I have recently identified a 48-line poem from 1643 as a likely specimen of Frisian from North Holland
    (Versloot 2018). Next to a one-line proverb from the Waterland region near Amsterdam, it seems to be
    the most extensive witness of Anglo-Frisian locally developed west of the Vlie. As far as attested in this
    brief text, it shows the Frisian features mentioned in Table 12.3.

                                                    344

=== page 345 ===
                                             North Sea Germanic Idiom

       Table 12.3 An overview of the dating and geographical spread of prominent North Sea
       Germanic linguistic developments.
North Sea Germanic             Date               Examples from          Distribution
changes                                           modern English/
                                                  modern West
                                                  Frisian < Proto-
                                                  (West) Germanic
1. Rounding of /a/ and /ā/     fifth century      month/moanne <         OE-AK(S) OF             FZH        EF,[WF]
                                                  *mānōþ-
2. Fronting of ā < PGmc        fifth century      sheep/skiep <          OE             OF       FZH        EF
ē1                                                *skāpa-
3. Fronting of PGmc /a/        fifth century      tail/teil < *tegl- <   OE             OF       FZH        [EF]
                                                  *tagla-
4. Monophthongization          early sixth        toe/tean <             OE             [OF]     [H]/       [EF,
PGmc /ai/ > ā                  century            *taixwō-                                       [ZF]?      WF]
5. Monophthongization          early sixth        beam/beam ‘tree’       (OE?)          OF       FZH        [EF,WF]
PGmc /au/ > ā                  century            < *bauma-
6. Loss of nasals before       400–600            us/ús < *uns           OE             OF       FZH        EF,WF
spirants
7. Palatalization of initial   sixth century      yield,church/          OE             OF       [FZH]      EF
/g/ and /k/ before front                          jilde,tsjerke <
vowels                                            *geldan-,*kyrikō-
8. i-mutation (‘secondary’) c. 600                green/grien <          OE             OF       FZH
                                                  *grōni-
9. Rising diphthongs <         early seventh      steer/stjoere <        [OE]           OF       H
PGmc eu                        century            *steurijan-
10. OFris. Breaking            seventh century right/rjocht <            [OE-K]         OF       H
                                               *rexta-
11. OEng. Breaking             seventh– ninth     heart/hert <           OE
                               centuries          *hertan-
12. Shortening of ai > æ       late seventh       ladder/ljedder <                      OF       ZH         EF,WF
                               century            *hlaidrō-
13. Raising of ǣ (PGmc         > 700              meadow/miede <         OE-AK          OF-S     FZH        EF
ē1) > ē                                           *māþwō-
14. Delabialization of         eighth–tenth       thin/tin < *þunwi- OE                 OF       FZH
mutated vowels                 centuries

       Abbreviations
       -


       OE = Old English: S = Saxon, A = Anglian, K = Kentish
       OF = Old Frisian (all dialects): S = ‘South Frisian’ – all varieties, except for Insular North Frisian
       Traces in Dutch coastal varieties: F = Flanders, Z = Zeeland, H = Holland
       EF = Eastphalian Old Saxon; WF = Westphalian Old Saxon
       […] = only under specific phonological conditions or with very little attested evidence.




                                                          345

=== page 346 ===
                                 Frisians of the Early Middle Ages

Developments 4, 6, 7(?), 8, 9 in Table 12.3 – and also, in a specific North Germanic form,
10 and 11 – are also found in North Germanic (Haugen 2004, 53–70).
   This shared chronology is not categorical: already before 600 we can detect differ-
entiation between English and Frisian in the monophthongization of PGmc *ai and
possibly also of *au; Old Saxon hardly participates in the fronting events, but evidence
from the northern part of Saxonia is lacking. In a few instances, there is also dialectal
differentiation within Old English and Old Frisian. The commonalities in the ‘inner
circle’ of North Sea Germanic do not end abruptly after 600 but continue into the
seventh and eighth centuries. This is very much in line with the concept of waves rather
than a discrete node on the language tree. A hybrid model, combining both shared,
areal phenomena as well as simultaneous gradual differentiation is sometimes called
the linkage model (see e.g. Schulte 2018, 20). The coastal language of Zeeland and
Flanders was not Frisian in a strict sense, perhaps already in the case of PGmc *ai,
but certainly from the seventh century onwards with the lack of Frisian breaking. The
whole Dutch coastal zone did, however, participate fully in the wider ‘Anglo-Frisian’
developments. Especially the varieties of Old Saxon spoken in the river basins of Weser
and Elbe, which were apparently oriented more towards the North Sea than the speech
of Saxons in the south-western regions near the Rhine, are involved in various of the
early changes but hardly in any of the later ones mentioned in this overview.5 A link
with North Germanic was particularly active from the sixth to the eighth centuries.
   The North Sea region with strong linguistic links is archaeologically characterized by
small-scale regionalization. The gradual break-up of the North Sea Germanic dialectal
continuum since the seventh century goes together with the formation of larger politi-
cal and cultural units, which can be understood as a period with growing inter-regional
contrasts and shrinking intra-regional contrasts (for the archaeological evidence, see
Nicolay 2017, passim and esp. 88): the building of larger territories in England, and
Frisia and Saxonia becoming a part of the Frankish Empire, with Scandinavia remain-
ing ‘pagan’ territory beyond those Christian kingdoms.
   Is there an Anglo-Frisian node in the West Germanic family tree? Not in a strict
sense, just as little as there was a West Germanic node (see the schema of differentia-
tion of Germanic in Nielsen 2000, 287–93).6 But there was a period in the history of
Germanic, roughly between AD 450 and 650, when varieties that later evolved into Fri-
sian and English shared most of their innovations (see, in a similar vein, Deckers 2017,
178–9). The innovative power of this region remained active into the ninth century.
Many of these innovations were at the time also found in the Dutch and Flemish coastal
regions and extensive parts of present-day northern Germany, but largely disappeared
from them after 800, leaving Frisian as an increasingly shrinking North Sea Germanic


5   Versloot and Adamczyk (2017) provide examples of a few more Old Saxon developments from the
    seventh and eighth centuries, not discussed in Table 12.3, which Old Saxon shared with Old Frisian
    and partly with Old English. Old Frisian and Old Saxon also share some morphological innovations
    not found in English, such as the productivity of the ending ‑u as a marker of the instrumental, the
    replacement of the nom.sg. ending of the ō-stems by the acc.sg. and the productivity of the i-stems,
    although much more limited in Frisian than in Saxon.
6   Even though English and Frisian are typologically definitely West Germanic in many aspects, they share
    many traits with Scandinavian that Continental West Germanic does not: traits that developed later
    than the typically West Germanic ones. This implies that there was not one, decisive split; see Euler
    (2013, 41–58) for an overview of features, with different emphases in his conclusions.

                                                  346

=== page 347 ===
                                       North Sea Germanic Idiom

relic language area on the Continent (Århammar 1990). As a consequence, Frisian and
English are the heirs of an ‘Anglo-Frisian’ sub-group of West Germanic which encom-
passed a much wider geographical area than only England and Friesland at the time of
its emergence in the Early Middle Ages.
On the origin of North Frisian
One of the major questions of Frisian historical linguistics has concerned the rela-
tionship between the so-called Insular North Frisian dialects, spoken on the islands
of Sylt, Helgoland, Föhr and Amrum, and the rest of Frisian. The issue boils down to
the following question: does the Insular North Frisian dialect group represent a branch
on the Frisian node, the result of migration from ‘South Frisia’, or does it represent
an – albeit closely related – autochthonous branch of a language spoken by a pre-Mi-
gration-period population that did not move to Britain or Frisia? Although situated in
the zone with tidal flats along the southern North Sea, Nordfriesland is historically not
a continuation of the southern regions: it was part of the Danish kingdom from the
Early Middle Ages and it is separated from the rest of Frisia by the region of Ditmarsch
without any historical reference to ‘Frisianness’ or traces of the Frisian language there.
This spatial interruption is also visible in the map in Figure 12.1, showing an interme-
diate zone with very few place-names in *haim or *ing, and it implies that the dialects
of the North Frisian islands are either an archaic relic zone or the result of historical
colonization from the south.
    There is quite some research on this topic and excellent discussions and summaries
can be found in Hofmann (1956) and Århammar (1968; 1990; 1995; 2001). There are
striking differences between the North Frisian dialects of the coast and the Halligen
on the one hand and the islands listed above on the other, in historical phonology and
lexicon (see the references). Moreover, the speakers of the island dialects do not iden-
tify their speech as ‘Frisian’, contrary to the speakers on the coast and Halligen.7 The
latter group is historically attested for the first time in the twelfth century and historical
geographical research points to a settlement from the south in the eleventh century
(Bantelmann et al. 1995, 62); the ‘Frisianness’ of the coastal and Halligen dialects is
not disputed in any way. An essential methodological issue is the question in what
respects the two groups of varieties (Insular North Frisian and all other dialects, here
referred to as ‘South’ Frisian, including the language of the North Frisian coast and
Halligen) should be similar or differ in order to consider either of the two hypotheses
as being refuted or proven. This poses the subsequent question: what makes Frisian
linguistically unique, compared with all other attested Germanic languages? Such lin-
guistic features will preferably represent linguist innovations, as archaisms do not prove
a common stage of development and can be found in any Germanic variety.8 Common


7   Although an incentive to open this discussion, this argument bears no weight in practice: the speakers’
    self-designations of the other Frisian island varieties are not ‘Frisian’ either, but simply the adjectival
    form of the name of the island or even of ‘islanders (speech)’. Simultaneously, dialects such as ‘Westfries’
    in North Holland (Netherlands) or ‘Ostfriesisch’ in Lower Saxony (Germany) owe their names to the
    regions and are varieties of Dutch and Low German respectively, although the regions were historically
    Frisian speaking.
8   It should be kept in mind that the application of terms such as ‘language’, ‘dialect’ or ‘variety’ are largely
    interchangeable in historical linguistics. Germanic is a ‘dialect’ that developed from Proto-Indo Euro-
    pean, whereas it is often considered to include various ‘languages’, such as English, Dutch, Frisian etc.,

                                                      347

=== page 348 ===
                                   Frisians of the Early Middle Ages

innovations that are fully and only implemented in one (group of) varieties are hard
to find: most linguistic innovations spread over larger areas and it is the combination
of a series of innovations and archaisms that characterize a language (group). Another
complication is that the varieties under consideration are closely related under both
hypotheses anyway and have been in constant contact with and influenced by other,
also related, neighbouring varieties. Last but not least, the dates associated with a
potential colonization scenario point to a time in history, the eighth century, when the
Germanic languages were not highly differentiated anyway.
   This hints at another aspect to take into consideration. The idea of an autochthonous
population on the islands, speaking some form of North Sea Germanic, was brought
forward based on the assumption that many of the typical North Sea Germanic features
had already developed on the Continent before the Migration Period (see Schwarz
1951, discussed above). If that were correct, the island dialects could be truly relics
of an otherwise vanished (emigrated) language of the southern Jutlandic peninsula.
However, the current interpretation works from the reconstruction that most of these
features only developed between the fifth and eighth centuries. If the island dialects
developed largely parallel but not identical to Frisian and English during that period,
why, for instance, did Ditmarsch or other parts of Jutland not participate, whereas the
North Frisian Islands did? This consideration weakens the ‘autochthonous’ hypothesis
substantially.
   Every interpretation starts from the well-founded observation that the Insular
North Frisian dialects’ closest genetic relatives are the ‘South’ Frisian dialects.9 This
narrows the question to be answered down to: is there a considerable body of inno-
vative features that are fully and only implemented in ‘South’ Frisian in comparison
with any third Germanic language and which are also found in Insular North Frisian?
The answer is ‘yes’. Key witnesses can be found in phonology, but also morphology and
lexicon (Århammar 1995, 73–7; 2001, 533):
    -
    1. The differentiation in the monophthongization of PGmc *ai (c. 500) as demon-
       strated by the following examples:
    		PGmc *klaiþ- ‘cloth, dress’ > OE clāþ > ModE cloth; OFris clāth(ar) (pl.) >
       ModWFris klean, ModINFris (Föhr) kluaser ‘clothes’; ModDu. kleed;
    		PGmc *staina- ‘stone’> OE stān ‘stone’ > ModE stone; OFris stēn > ModWFris
       stien, ModINFris (Föhr) stian; ModDu. steen.




    each with its own ‘dialects’. So, ‘dialect’ primarily refers to a genetic and diachronic relationship whereas
    ‘language’ refers to a group of linguistically closely related dialects. All are ‘varieties’ of language. The
    use of these terms here should not be confused with their sociolinguistic application, where ‘language’
    is mostly associated with a codified, normalized and standardized language variety with high prestige
    in the society while the term ‘dialect’ is mostly applied to spoken vernaculars.
9   This is not to be confused with the linguistic distance among the present-day Frisian varieties. Most
    of these are not mutually intelligible and the distances between them are greater than among the three
    Scandinavian languages Danish, Norwegian and Swedish, or between Dutch and Afrikaans (Swarte et
    al. 2013, 297–8). Both among and even within the two North Frisian subgroups, mutual intelligibility
    is not obvious (Århammar 1975). The strong contrast between the modern Frisian variants (e.g. under
    1., immediately below) attests to the disparate development of the varieties of Frisian varieties since the
    Early Middle Ages.

                                                      348

=== page 349 ===
                                North Sea Germanic Idiom

The lexical distribution of forms pointing to an earlier *ā or *ē is nearly identical across
‘South’ Frisian and Insular North Frisian (Versloot 2017a, 304–5).
   -

   2. The breaking of PGmc *e before *xt to iu, as in OFris riucht < *rexta- and instances
      of breaking by following *u/w as in OFris niugen < *nigun < *niun, ModWFris
      rjocht, njoggen, ModINFris (Föhr) rocht, njüügen ‘right’, ‘nine’. These breaking
      phenomena are also found in some varieties of Old English (e.g. incidental reoht,
      niogen alongside dominant riht, nigon) as well as in Old Norse, but the phono-
      logical conditioning and the actual lexical distribution of breaking phenomena is
      unique across all Frisian varieties.
   3. Generalization of the fronting of PGmc *a in the feminine ō-stems, e.g. PGmc
      *talō-, OE talu, ModDu. taal, OFris tele > ModWFris tel(tsje), ModINFris (Sylt)
      tial ‘story’.
   4. The ending -ar in the nominative plural of the masculine a-stems, OFris bāmar
      ‘trees’, ModINFris (Föhr) buumer, cf. OE bēamas, Old Saxon boumas. Frisian is
      the only West Germanic language with this ending (Versloot 2014b; 2017b). The
      ending is common in Old Norse, but in a different distribution than in Frisian.
      Its morphological distribution is unique for Frisian, where it appears also in the
      s-stems, e.g. Föhr ai – aier ‘egg(s)’, but where it is absent in Old Norse: egg (sg. and
      pl.).
   5. The semantic shift of PGmc *texxō- ‘group, community’, OE tiohh, ModHG
      Zeche, to the fieldname OFris *tiuche ‘land parcel’, found on Föhr as Tjüüch, in
      the place-name Tjuchem (prov. Groningen) and the historical fieldname ‘t Joch
      (near Leiden in Holland) (Hofmann 1972).
   -
The aggregated evidence leads to a common reconstructable ancestor for all Frisian
varieties, including Insular North Frisian, that can be dated to the period somewhere
between 650 and 850. This dating is based on runic inscriptions and names in early
medieval Latin texts (Gysseling 1962; Versloot 2014a). The timeframe matches the
archaeological evidence concerning new or strongly extended settlements in the North
Frisian Islands (see Majchczack, this vol.).


            The speakers of Anglo-Frisian: origins and distribution
The demographic and societal context
Assuming that the proposed reform of the Old English phonological history fits, and
that Table 12.3 is an adequate interpretation of the attested linguistic facts, one may
wonder whether there was any reconstructable historical reality that supports the idea
that language changes were able to spread so easily and in many instances so com-
pletely across the North Sea. The reconstruction given in Table 12.3 suggests in fact
that the speakers on either side of the North Sea made up one speech community, with
only minor dialectal differences, for at least two hundred years (c. AD 450–650) (for
archaeological evidence of such a common zone, see Nicolay 2005; 2014). This pre-
supposes intensive language contacts. These contacts may have run primarily through
close contacts at various levels and among specific groups in the society, such as trading
communities, or elite and warrior classes in these early societies, including marriages
(Bos and Brouwer 2005); see Deckers (2017) and Kauhanen (2017) for a modelwise

                                             349

=== page 350 ===
                            Frisians of the Early Middle Ages

underpinning of such processes. One may assume that in a pre-feudal belligerent
landnam society, more people were involved in overseas contacts than at later dates,
comparable with the differences we can observe in geographical and social mobility
between Viking-age Iceland and late- and post-medieval Iceland.
    When considering the people speaking Anglo-Frisian, a relevant question is: where
exactly did these people live and where did they come from? The Frisian marshlands
were in the process of being repopulated from the late fourth century, a process that
lasted until the seventh century for the easternmost region of Land Wursten (Aufder-
haar 2017). The innovative, developing Proto-Frisian spread from west to east. The
various stages of migrations are visible in the place-name landscape: in most of Frisia,
compounds containing PGmc. *‑haim are dominant, but in the east (Wangerland,
Butjadingen, Land Wursten) names in *‑ing- are more numerous (see also Fig. 12.1),
although both exist side by side (Versloot 2011, 133–4).
    In a similar vein, the anglicization of England will have taken some time, but this
took place in a country with a population present. The character of the process of angli-
cization (the ‘how’, the speed, the numbers) is still heavily disputed (Higham and Ryan
2015, 70–125). The estimations of percentages of Germanic immigrants vary consider-
ably. A recent study estimates ‘the proportion of Saxon ancestry in Cent./S England as
very likely to be under 50%, and most likely in the range of 10–40%’ (Leslie et al. 2015,
313). Note that Leslie et al. use the term ‘Saxon’ for people associated both with northern
Germany and Denmark, not distinguishing between the potential regions of origin of
Angles, Saxons and Jutes (cf. below). Some studies suggest a strong gender bias among
the settlers: the proportion of male DNA may have touched the mentioned upper limit,
the female DNA rather the lower limit (Vonderach 2015, 284). This interpretation sup-
ports the classical view as presented, for example, in Gildas’s chronicle (Higham and
Ryan 2015, 57–62) that especially the first wave of Anglo-Saxon immigrants consisted
primarily of bands of male warriors, subjugating Britain and its inhabitants by mili-
tary force. More research, in particular based on contemporaneous genetic material,
is needed.
    The warrior-like behaviour and the overall confined (not necessarily small) number
of the invaders make it unlikely that the whole of what we later call England was directly
Germanic-speaking from the outset of the Anglo-Saxon invasion. A period of conquest
was probably followed by a much longer period of cultural and linguistic anglicization
of the remaining population.
Linguistic evidence of the first Anglo-Frisian settlers
An indication of the concentration of populations speaking Anglo-Frisian varieties
may come from various sources, both archaeological and linguistic. Place-names are
often mentioned as an indication of earlier demographic movements, such as settle-
ment and colonization. It is generally accepted that place-names using the PGmc suf-
fixes *haim ‘house, village’ and *ing ‘belonging to’, often with a proper name as the first
element, mark Germanic settlement from the period of the Great Migrations (Berger
1993, 13–15). Apart from those two suffixes, a few more suffixes are commonly asso-
ciated with Germanic-speaking settlers of the fifth and sixth centuries: the names in
leben/-lev ‘remains, legacy’, with high densities in Thüringen; place-names containing
PGmc *stadi- ‘spot, locality’; and names in court and ville in France, with counterparts
in hofen and wihl,weil(er) and more in German (Nielsen 2000, 303–12; König 2001, 58).

                                           350

=== page 351 ===
                               North Sea Germanic Idiom

The elements court, ville/wihl etc. are of Romance origin. Place-names containing any
of these suffixes have been gathered from a digital gazetteer and regions with dominant
patterns computed (for a technical account of the sources and selection filters applied,
see Appendix). The result is shown in Figure 12.1.
   The special focus of Figure 12.1 is on the relation between the locations of runic
finds from the fourth to sixth centuries and the place-names commonly associated with
the Migration Period. Most of the latter are located south-west of the former Roman
Limes, including Britain. The coloured areas in Figure 12.1 cover 20% of the territories
of the UK, the Benelux countries, Germany and Austria, whereas 69% of all runic finds
are found against the background of one of these name-types. People able to write
(West Germanic) runic texts lived predominantly in those regions which place-name
evidence would associate with new settlers.




Fig. 12.1 A range of name-types commonly held (predominantly) to represent settlements
from the Early Middle Ages, together with the distribution of runic finds. The mapping
identifies the dominant variant among the six name-types in a particular region, and picks
out regions where the sum of names of these six types is higher than the median.

                                           351

=== page 352 ===
Fig. 12.2 The relative proportions of the name-types in Figure 12.1 (grey: ‘overall’) and the
distribution of runic finds of the third–eighth centuries correlated with the name-types.
Areas and runic finds that are not associated with any of the six name-types (32 out of 103)
are not included.




Fig. 12.3 The correlation between the Anglo-Frisian and Continental runic finds of the
third–eighth centuries and the various name-types. Runic finds not associated with any of
the six names analysed (32 out of 103) are not included.

=== page 353 ===
                               North Sea Germanic Idiom

   The comparison with the six different name-types also reveals another special cor-
relation: among these name types, the *haim and *ing names show the closest asso-
ciation with the runic finds. Figure 12.2 shows that, while the *haim and *ing are the
most frequent types in the map among the six types investigated, the runic finds are
even more strongly associated with these two name-types than following a random
distribution over the six types. However, names with the *haim and *ing suffixes are
not evenly associated with the various sub-groups of inscriptions. There is a clear link
between Anglo-Frisian runes and *haim names on the one hand and between Conti-
nental runes and *ing names on the other, as illustrated in Figure 12.3. This correlates
with the uneven geographical spread of the *haim and *ing suffixes.
   This analysis confirms and underlines the close relationship between the settlers of
the Migration Period and the production of runic inscriptions outside Scandinavia.
Apart from Frisia, which was newly settled from the fifth century after the hiatus in
the fourth century (Nicolay 2005; Nieuwhof 2016), almost all inscriptions are found
on former Roman territory. Why the geographical association between runic finds and
place-names is almost exclusively restricted to names with the *haim and *ing, and
appears to a much lesser extent with other names that are usually considered to date
to the same period, is not easy to answer. In addition, there is the question why the use
of runes seems to be so heavily restricted to newly settled regions and much less to the




Fig. 12.4 Evidence of Germanic settlement and the distribution of early runic inscriptions
of the fifth and sixth centuries (© author, using coordinates for Continental runes from
Findell 2012).

                                           353

=== page 354 ===
                              Frisians of the Early Middle Ages

regions the Germanic peoples settled before. Note that the few Continental inscriptions
north of the Limes are mostly found in or near to regions with a clear presence of one
or more of the six name types investigated.
   Following these observations concerning the six name-types studied, the focus was
narrowed to names with the suffixes *haim and *ing, whose spread was combined in the
map in Figure 12.4, again as the background to the distribution of runic finds of the fifth
and sixth centuries. This distribution map confirms the observations made on the basis




Fig. 12.5 (above) The
overall areal proportion
of names ending in
*-haim or *-ing in the
West Germanic speaking
countries: UK (GB),
the Netherlands (NL),
Belgium (B), Luxembourg
(L), Germany (D) and
Austria (A); (below) the
proportional correlation of
these points with a runic
find. The y-axis represents
the number of map-pixels;
the x-axis represents
ranges of proportions
for the specific names
amongst all other names
within the given area. Note
that >= 0 means >0–0.09
and the ranges of the bars
are exclusive.

                                            354

=== page 355 ===
                                    North Sea Germanic Idiom

of Figure 12.1: there are high concentrations of names with the suffixes *haim and *ing in
the regions south and west of the Roman Limes (in present-day Flanders, south-western
Germany and Alsace), in Friesland and in eastern England. They confirm their inter-
pretation as settler names from the fifth and sixth centuries. The over-representation of
runic finds in regions with these name types is illustrated diagrammatically in Figure
12.5. The figure shows that runic finds are often located in regions with 10–50% *haim and
*ing place-names, whereas such regions are altogether a rarity in the Germanic-speaking
western European countries (lower bar chart).10
   The mapped evidence in this section implies that we now have two independent
sources about language use, that are in strong agreement with each other: people writ-
ing runic texts (mostly brief inscriptions) lived in regions where many villages had
a Germanic Migration Period settlement name, in particular with the suffixes *haim
and *ing. This again poses the question why we have inscriptions from just these
places but not (to the same degree) from other regions. People elsewhere apparently
did not feel the need or were not able to write runic inscriptions. This makes sense for
England and Continental regions south of the Limes, where many places were most
likely still inhabited by the descendants of the Roman-period populations that had
been living there before the arrival of Germanic-speaking groups. This hypothesis
may particularly apply to the names in *villa, which is a Latin suffix after all. In the
case of the regions north of the Limes, it has been claimed that these witnessed high
levels of mobility and demographic relocation, producing relatively low population
densities in northern Germany for longer or shorter periods (Siegmund 2003, 77–83;
Meier 2003, 49; Dörfler 2003, 143). It seems that the elites in particular left the region
in the period of the fifth–seventh centuries (Siegmund 2003, 90). Major factors were
probably migrations to Frisia, Britain and the former Roman Empire as well as cli-
matic circumstances (the Late Antique Little Ice Age, LALIA: Büntgen et al. 2016).
Note also Bede’s remark about Anglia (Angeln) still being deserted in the seventh cen-
tury (Bede, HE, I, 15).
Combining linguistic and archaeological evidence
This section will concentrate on the Anglo-Frisian settlers in Frisia and Britain, iden-
tified by Anglo-Frisian runic inscriptions. The hypothesis of a specific regional spread
of ‘Anglo-Saxon’ migrants in the fifth and sixth centuries can be compared with archae-
ological evidence. We have compared the spread of Migration Period place-names
and runic inscriptions with the locations of various types of brooch dated to the fifth
century. One such object-type is the cruciform brooch, an object of daily use in female
clothing (Nicolay 2005, 74–5; Martin 2015). The earliest specimens were produced in the
homelands and relatively long preserved as ‘souvenirs’ from home (Bos and Brouwer


10 A caveat is due. The map is based on modern place-names and it is well known from diachronic evalua-
   tions of the onomastic landscape that there have been some substantial changes. Blok (1968) shows that
   the southern part of Holland – entirely white in Figures 12.1 and 12.4 – may have had around 25% ‑haim
   names in the Early Middle Ages but many of these names simply disappeared as a result of changes in
   the landscape. Such drastic changes are in particular likely where dramatic changes in the landscape
   occurred. Holland is such a region but far greater stability can be assumed for many other regions.
   Another complication is the exchange of suffixes, such as in the place-name Dokkum (Fryslân), counted
   here as a name with the ending *‑haim, but historically attested as Dockinga, which would qualify it as
   a member of the *‑ing group.

                                                   355

=== page 356 ===
                            Frisians of the Early Middle Ages




Fig. 12.6 The distribution of early cruciform brooches, c. AD 380–450 (after Nicolay 2005,
74) and fifth-century Saxon-style brooches (after Nicolay 2017, 78), against the background
of Migration-period place-names (© author).



2005, 20–2, 30). Another type of brooch, the ‘Saxon’ jewellery, is usually associated
with the formation of power (Nicolay 2005, 76–8, 87; see also Higham and Ryan 2015,
85–6, 107). Both types are shown against the background of the Migration Period place-
names in Figure 12.6.
    The distribution of the brooches in Frisia and Britain is closely linked to the
­Migration-Period place-names, as were the runic inscriptions. Stray finds of both types
 of artefact and *haim and *ing names are found in Flanders, as well as an Anglo-Frisian
runic inscription from Amay (Looijenga 2003, 303; see Fig. 12.4). This inscription, from
a grave near Liège, is considered to be Anglo-Frisian because it contains a specifically
Anglo-Frisian runic character, but it is not necessarily Frisian in any narrower linguis-
tic, ethnic or cultural sense. It may represent a local community that migrated there
from the same area as the other ‘Anglo-Frisians’ and shared linguistic features, place-
name types and artefacts with the nascent Frisian and Anglo-Saxon populations.
    However, the *haim and *ing names are notoriously absent from the regions of
origin of the settlers, where such brooches are also found. The villages from which the
settlers of Frisia and Britain came apparently had different names, or were deserted – as
Bede describes for Angeln – and their original names have not been preserved due
to a hiatus in habitation (Siegmund 2003, 80–1). This mismatch in place-names was
extensively studied by Udolph, who concluded that the Schleswig-Holstein region in

                                           356

=== page 357 ===
                                      North Sea Germanic Idiom

particular could not be considered a region of origin of the Anglo-Saxons, given the
lack of onomastic links between that region and England (Udolph 2006, 338). However,
he did not consider the possibility of a break in habitation. After the Migration Period,
Angeln was taken over by the Danes, who brought now-Germanized Scandinavian
place-names to the region, such as: Tastrop, Gelting, Böklund, Schuby. The low popu-
lation level in this region correlates with the absence of runic inscriptions from these
regions from the sixth (Fig. 12.4) and seventh centuries.
    We have extended the scope for Britain by including two additional layers of infor-
mation. In the first place, we have included furnished Anglo-Saxon cemeteries from
the fifth–seventh centuries. We also included a set of place-names with a Celtic suffix,
namely place-names in don or dun, such as in Swindon.11 These names are relatively
frequent in England but not in the western Celtic regions Wales and Cornwall. The set
of names in don or dun therefore seems to continue an earlier layer of British place-
names. The result is shown in Figure 12.7.
    The map and the underlying map calculations show that the concentration of names
in haim and ing on the one hand and names in don or dun on the other are geographi-
cally complementary. The colours in the map are potential markers of the geographical
spread of ethnicities in England in that period. The map again shows the distribution
of Anglo-Saxon runic inscriptions of the fifth to seventh centuries.
    The spatial correlation between the linguistic/onomastic evidence and the archae-
ological evidence of cemeteries is clearly very low (Dodgson 1966). There is positive
agreement in Kent, East Anglia and Sussex, and negative agreement (no Anglo-Saxon
place-names, no Anglo-Saxon graves and no runic inscriptions) in Hertfordshire. But
there are also large mismatches, for example, in Oxfordshire, Warwickshire and near
surroundings. At this point, it is not possible to give an explanation. It would be good
to have a further differentiation in time of the cemeteries. It may be interpreted in a
way that the archaeological information shows us the progress of acculturalization of
the British population to the Anglo-Saxons’ burial practices. This acculturalization or
assimilation of Britons to Anglo-Saxon society was essential for the former to be able
to function on an equal footing with the newcomers (Higham and Ryan 2015, 109–10).
The contrast with the spread of the runic finds would imply that material and custom-
ary culture were adopted earlier than the language, which is in line with processes of
culture and language shifts in many other places in the world.

                          Excursus I: ‘Angles’, ‘Jutes’ and ‘Saxons’
The earlier inclination to treat the populations discussed as cultural, political and lin-
guistic unities, in the way it is applied by, inter alios, Schwarz (1951) as an example of an
earlier paradigm of scholarship (see also Higham and Ryan 2015, 71), has been aban-
doned over the last decades. The author of the Anglo-Saxon Chronicle from the late

11 Gelling and Cole (2000) interpret Celtic *dūno- as ‘fortified place’ while dūn in English place-names
   occurs ‘as a generic in village names in regions where there are clusters of level-topped hills suitable for
   settlement sites’. The lack of fortifications at English places with dūn names persuades Gelling and Cole
   that dūn and *dūno cannot be associated. However, Celtic fortified oppida were situated on hill tops so
   that a semantic shift from ‘fortified site on a hill top’ to ‘settlement on a hill top’ is hardly implausible
   (cf. the semantic spread of Germanic *tūna- to German Zaun ‘fence’, Dutch tuin ‘garden’, Icelandic tún
   ‘meadow’ and English ‘town’).

                                                     357

=== page 358 ===
                           Frisians of the Early Middle Ages




Fig. 12.7 Possible evidence of Anglo-Saxon and British populations in England during the
fifth–seventh centuries. The distribution of place-names is based on a modern gazetteer
(see Appendix). Using place-name databases with onomastic etymologies might improve,
or even alter, the picture. (© author; distribution of cemeteries after Higham and Ryan
2015, 80).

                                          358

=== page 359 ===
                               North Sea Germanic Idiom

ninth century is said to have ‘had no reliable sources for the fifth century’ (Higham and
Ryan 2015, 72). Higham and Ryan are reasonably representative of current mainstream
opinion in archaeology. Bede (HE, I, 15) is the classical source for a tripartition of
England between Angles, Saxons and Jutes, an account that is currently interpreted as
having been ‘framed according to the geopolitics of the present’ (i.e., Bede’s time), with
‘little historical validity’ (Higham and Ryan 2015, 75). Bede’s eighth-century description
of the three peoples, settling in Britain in the fifth century, is nowadays considered ‘too
late to be a useful primary source’ (Higham and Ryan 2015, 72). Bede himself, how-
ever, is recognized as having ‘believed that the major kingships of the seventh century
had their origins in the settlements of different Germanic tribes in the fifth century’
(Higham and Ryan 2015, 137).
    The concept of clearly distinguishable peoples is replaced by the concept of occa-
sional coalitions of ethnically diverse people, united under a leader for the purpose of a
military campaign (e.g. Todd 2004, 29, 202–3). Archaeology traditionally distinguishes
between Saxon and Anglian artefacts, but Higham and Ryan consistently put those
designations in quotation marks, to stress their relativity (2015, 78–82). Although they
acknowledge a strong correlation between ‘Anglian’ areas and cremation, and ‘Saxon’
areas and inhumation, they stress that those patterns are becoming more and more
blurred with new data being available. This is supported by their maps (ibid., 80), show-
ing different types of ‘Anglian’ and ‘Saxon’ artefacts with some geographical inclination
but a large spatial overlap as well. And despite the affinity between ‘Saxon’ artefacts and
practices and those found in the Elbe-Weser triangle, against overlap between ‘Anglian’
items and artefacts found north and east of the Elbe, they state that ‘these styles were
already mixing on the Continent by the late fourth century, and the degree of regional
conformity in England is less than was once suggested. Such is the diversity of artefacts
that to date no Anglo-Saxon cemetery has been definitively tied to a specific place of
origin in Germany as if the result of migration en bloc to Britain.’ (ibid., 82).
    Given all these misgivings, the pattern displayed in Figure 12.8 is astonishing. It
demonstrates that nearly all the runic inscriptions from the fifth–seventh centuries,
except for Watchfield but including the two that are mostly considered to be of Fri-
sian origin (Hamwic and Folkestone), have been found in or very near the territories
identified by Bede as Anglian and Jutish. This spatial correlation provides independ-
ent evidence – unknown to Bede (!) – for the geographical tripartition along the lines
described by Bede in the eighth century.
    The implications of this correlation work in two directions. On the one hand, we
may have to reconsider the refutation of Bede’s tripartition for the fifth and sixth cen-
turies. Bede’s sketch may have more ‘historical validity’ than currently assigned to it
and its rejection seems to be an example of over-application of ‘critical theory’ in the
interpretation of historical sources and the relativization of their historical accuracy. A
clear ethnic, ‘tribal’ or national (whichever term one prefers) identity for a settler com-
munity does not presuppose the uniform origin of all its members, but rather a clear
destination territory in combination with a substantial founder community. Examples
are found in countries such as New Zealand, Australia, Canada and the United States.
We do not need full regional conformity nor en bloc migration from one place in order
to end up with fairly distinct cultural provinces or nations in the new settlements.
    The correlation shown in Figure 12.8 also implies that the Saxons did not use/know
the runic script, whereas the Angles and Jutes did. Given the dominant regions of

                                           359

=== page 360 ===
                             Frisians of the Early Middle Ages




Fig. 12.8 The find spots of Anglo-Frisian runic inscriptions of the fifth–seventh centuries
against the background of a traditional ethno-political map of England in the sixth
century. The base map ‘England in 584’ has been taken from A School Atlas of English, ed.
Samuel Rawson Gardiner 1907 (London).



                                            360

=== page 361 ===
                                North Sea Germanic Idiom

origin of these groups, south-west and north-east of the Elbe respectively, it suggests
that the runic script was not much used in regions south-west of the Elbe before the
Migration Period. It also implies that there was a substantial Anglian and/or Jutish
contribution in the settlement of the Frisian marshlands, where runic inscriptions have
been found. Figure 12.6 shows indeed various ‘Anglian’ cruciform brooches in the west-
ern Frisian terp region. Scandinavian cultural ‘input’ is particularly noticeable from the
late fifth century and sixth centuries (Nicolay 2005, 78), which overlaps exactly with
the increased production of runic texts in the Frisian region (see further, Excursus II,
below).
   The Saxons and (western) Franks apparently did not know the runic alphabet, or at
least did not use it extensively on inscriptions. The majority of the Continental runes
are found in the Alemannic region, and the core of this population is generally associ-
ated with the Elbe-Germanic region (Quak 2016, 316–17). This means that the origins
of the West Germanic peoples making extensive use of the runic alphabet between the
fourth and eighth centuries can all be associated with a region of origin roughly north
and north-east of the Elbe, contiguous with Scandinavia. This geographical bias is sup-
ported by a diachronic bias: whereas runic finds are relatively common in Scandinavia
from before 400, the bulk of the West Germanic inscriptions are from the fifth and
especially the sixth century. Still, all this may be not that simple: first, it is question-
able to what extent a concept such as ‘Elbe-Germanic’ is still supported by modern
archaeologys secondly, the Alemannic people are already mentioned near the Rhine
and Danube in the late third century, which is three hundred years before the bulk of
the ‘South Germanic’ inscriptions in the sixth century.

                Excursus II: thi koning Redbad fan Danemercum
The late-medieval Frisian text sources include a remarkable piece, known as the
‘Legend of Charlemagne and Redbad’ (Vries 2007, 50, 74–7; Bremmer 2009, 174–6; for
a recently improved reconstruction of the oldest version in Codex Unia, see http://tdb.
fryske-akademy.eu/temp/karel-en-redbad/). The story begins with:
   Tha thi koning Karle and thi koning Redbad fan Danemercum in that land comen …
   When King Charles and King Redbad from Denmark came into the country …
and tells of the victory of Charles over Redbad (Radbod) and subsequently the origin
of Frisian law. ‘Karle’ is generally conceived of as being Charlemagne, who is also oth-
erwise mentioned as the benefactor of Frisian law and Frisian freedom in the medieval
Frisian tradition (Noomen 2001). In reality, it was his grandfather Charles Martel who
fought a battle with the Frisian king Radbod in 716 and eventually initiated the con-
quest of the western parts of Frisia after Radbod’s death. Radbod is often associated
with the ‘North’ as in the addition ‘fan Danemercum’. The seventh statute of the ‘Seven-
teen Statutes’ (version U: Sytsema 2012) states:
   That jef him thi koning Karle that truch se Cristen worden, and henzich, and herich tha
   sutherna koninge […] hwand alle Fresan er nord herden an tha grimma hirna.




                                            361

=== page 362 ===
                                Frisians of the Early Middle Ages

   This [privilege] gave King Charles them [= the Frisians], because they became Chris-
   tians, and obedient, and dependent on the southern King [of the Franks] … because
   all Frisians earlier belonged to the north in the dark outskirts [of civilization].
The ‘North’ is repeatedly mentioned in medieval sources as the origin of the Vikings
and their attacks on Frisia (IJssennagger 2012, 38–40) and another OFris passage in
R1 (Buma and Ebel 1963, 36–7) explicitly associates Redbad with the violent attack-
ers from the north: thet wi er north herdon Redbate tha unfrethemonne ‘because we
earlier belonged to the violent, northern [king] Redbad’ (see Popkema 2013, 197). So,
the legend seems to contain a double anachronism: ‘Karle’ is both Charles Martel and
Charlemagne while the Frisian king Redbad is associated with the Viking raids, which
post-dated the reign of Charlemagne.
   Noomen (2001, 15) stated that De sêge is dêrmei gjin selsstannige boarne foar de
kennis fan dy wrald, ‘the legend cannot be taken as an independent source of knowl-
edge about the world [of the Early Middle Ages]’, but it may echo real events from
earlier times. The ruling classes in Frisia in the second part of the fifth and early sixth
centuries had close ties to Scandinavia (Jutland and Norway) and felt and maintained
them well into the seventh century (Nicolay 2005, 78–85; 2017, 87).12 This brings us
chronologically close to the appearance of Radbod in history. The collocation Redbad
fan Danemercum may, therefore, not (only) reflect a late-medieval confusion between
seventh-/eighth-century pagan Frisians and ninth-/tenth-century pagan Vikings, but
just as well echo the self-purported Scandinavian link or even origin of the sixth- and
seventh-century Frisian rulers.

                                 Discussion and conclusions
We conclude that the North Sea region witnessed the formation of the Anglo-Frisian
idiom by a series of shared innovative linguistic changes, which at that time mostly
also included the coastal zone of the Low Countries and parts of the continental
Saxon region. The heydays of these developments fall in the fifth–seventh centuries.
The geographical spread of these changes was not monolithic and differed per feature:
some spread wider than the North Sea Germanic area, including sometimes (parts of)
North Germanic, sometimes also parts of the Franconian regions, others encompassed
only parts of this ‘Anglo-Frisian’ Sprachbund. The question about a separate branch on
the Germanic language tree or a matter of convergence is actually superfluous under
a more subtle interpretation of the developments: after a period of strong linguistic
convergence, divergent tendencies became more prominent from the seventh century,
although common innovations could still develop in the following centuries (Hines
1995; Deckers 2017).
   The Anglo-Frisian speakers were dispersed over Frisia (in its widest sense down
to Calais), the (north)eastern parts of the Continental Saxon region (compare the
Eastphalian involvement in most of the early sound changes in Table 12.3) and in Brit-
ain, in particular the eastern parts, in regions close to the North Sea. The language
area was – certainly to begin with – no solid geographical territory, although spatial


12 In Nicolay (2005) this is attributed to a separate wave of immigration, but Nicolay (pers. comm.) now
   considers it rather to be a cultural phenomenon.

                                                 362

=== page 363 ===
                                North Sea Germanic Idiom

concentrations existed. Anglo-Frisian in England was concentrated in some areas but
otherwise rather a sociolect or ethnolect, whose speakers were foremost connected by
their political and military power and their common ethnicity, including their reli-
gion (compare the position of the Goths in Italy and Spain and the Vandals in North
Africa). It is revealing to see that, at least in the fifth and sixth centuries, regions such
as Mercia and Wessex, later considered to be constituting the OE dialect landscape and
well represented on the map with Anglo-Saxon cemeteries, seem barely to have been
inhabited by speakers of Anglo-Saxon idioms, but remained numerically dominated
by Romano-British descendants during the first two centuries after the landnam (cf.
Grimmer 2007).
    The Frisian region was largely resettled in the same period as Britain, but here the
settlers found a nearly empty region. Both regions are strongly marked by the topo-
nymic landscape and their inhabitants knew how to write runic texts. This contrasts
strongly with the Elbe-Weser region from where those populations had come. There
are very few *haim and *ing names there, and basically no runic inscriptions after the
fifth century (Sievern, Fallward, Heide and Geltorf II are all from the fifth century). A
clearer picture of the historical-geographical landscape of those days of present-day
northern Germany may help us to better understand the dynamics of Anglo-Frisian
on the Continent.

                 Appendix: Sources for the place-name mapping
The maps with place-names are based on the Geonames gazetteer:
https://www.geonames.org/
   -

The data were analysed and mapped using ILWIS 3.31 Academic GIS-software:
https://www.itc.nl/ilwis/download/ilwis33/
   -

The following text filters were applied:
   -
TypeFilter
-court/-hofen: *hofen,*hoven,*court
*-haim: *heim,*um,*hem,*ham,*gem,*hjem
*-ingi: *ing,*ingen,*inghen,*ingh,*ingi,*inge,*ange; *ens (only for Frisia)
-leben, -lev: *leben,*lev
*stadi: *sted,*stedt,*stett,*stede,*stead,*stätten,*städten
*villa: *ville,*viller,*vijl*,*weil,*weiler,*wihl*
   -

In total, 13,430 points were selected.
   -

The map in Figure 12.1 was smoothed using a moving window of 13 x 13 pixels. Before
smoothing the image, those pixels with a summed proportion of any of the six name-
types >12% were selected. This is the sum of the average proportion in the entire map
area plus one standard deviation. The average proportion was computed for a moving
window of 21 x 21 pixels. Every pixel corresponds to one square kilometre.




                                            363

=== page 364 ===
                                  Frisians of the Early Middle Ages

                                               Discussion
HINES Is there any place in your model for Peter Schrijver’s ideas that Celtic
  substrates were present and had a significant influence on both Old Frisian and
  Old English?
VERSLOOT I can imagine Celtic influence in England, because of the population
  situation when speakers of Germanic arrived. But Frisia was largely depopulated.
  I don’t dispute the case that Frisia could have been Celtic-speaking in the Roman
  Period. But I find his arguments a bit far-fetched. I very much admire his creativity
  and his ability to open new windows, but on some points he is too bold. However,
  breaking in English could well be Celtic-influenced. Breaking is more prevalent in
  West Saxon than in Northumbrian Old English and Celtic influence was probably
  greater in the west.13
HINES Without going too deeply into details of the chronology of sound changes,
  one of the immediate problems that appears is that the reason why breaking is put
  before i-mutation is because we have i-mutated broken diphthongs. How do you
  get around that? Do you propose that breaking is not a single process? Could there
  have been a West Saxon breaking that is early, and potentially Celtic-influenced?
  You have both primary and secondary i-mutation too.
VERSLOOT Yes, it does require very lengthy analysis. The earliest evidence I can
  use is non-West Saxon. This is a problem of the evidence we have. The West Saxon
  situation is a specific problem, but that would have been spoken very far to the
  west, deep into a linguistic contact zone. I see its features as a bit of a side-track,
  rather than central to Old English. In Northumbria and Mercia, the i-mutation
  product of a so-called broken vowel is a monophthong.
HINES The Old English runic inscriptions are overwhelmingly ‘Anglian’ in terms
  of geography. Those from Kent and the Isle of Wight are particularly challenging
  in terms of legibility and intelligibility. From the heart of the Saxon area there
  is only the Watchfield inscription from the sixth century, and in fact that
  whole assemblage looks strikingly Kentish in key respects. On the whole, the
  runic inscriptions give us really valuable evidence for Anglian dialect areas of
  East Anglia, Lincolnshire, and subsequently Northumbria, but very much less
  information outside of that zone.
VERSLOOT In Anglian dialects, it was assumed there was widespread breaking that
  was later undone, but I’d like to see evidence of that. There is none. There is rather
  much to suggest there was no early breaking.
DE LANGEN When you discussed North Frisian you said you saw influence from
  the south. Where is that? And is that area ‘monolithic’?
VERSLOOT Yes, from the features listed, it is a monolith.
DE LANGEN And it includes the Rhineland?
VERSLOOT It includes North-Holland.

13 The chronology of sound changes reconstructed for Gallo-Romance in the period AD 400–700 is
   revealing – including: 1. fronting of a/ā; 2. palatalization of velars before fronted vowels; 3. retraction
   of æ > a before w, n (among other things); 4. diphthongization of e when following a palatal consonant
   (≈ palatal diphthongization) (Kerkhof 2018, 120). The close resemblance of these to the developments
   in pre-Old English sheds new light on the areal distribution of so-called ‘North Sea Germanic develop-
   ments’ and their potential sources. APV

                                                    364

=== page 365 ===
                              North Sea Germanic Idiom

DE LANGEN Where is the boundary?
VERSLOOT Somewhere south of the Oude Rijn (near Leiden).
DE LANGEN That is interesting!
VERSLOOT I may perhaps mention that up to now there has been no Frisian text
  identified from North-Holland, but I found one that was already known which
  can be reinterpreted as originating from there. It is about love; it has been in the
  newspapers. Salacious stories attract attention! That is the first piece we have
  (Versloot 2018). It’s also different from West Frisian, spoken in the province
  of Fryslân. But in terms of the early features, it shares all of those. In terms of
  linguistic features, the boundary between the Maas and the IJ is much more
  important than the Vlie.
DE LANGEN A little bit more about the Rhineland. How much difference is there:
  when do the language dialects part?
VERSLOOT Up to a given point (Tab. 12.3, point 9) we have relic features in
  Flanders, Zeeland and Holland. This appears to be early seventh-century to me.
  After that Zeeland and Flanders no longer follow, but it doesn’t mean they can’t
  share in innovations afterwards. The wave model allows for variability. But up to
  that point there seems to be a single linguistic zone, except for some differentiation
  a little earlier on (see the Old Saxon column in Table 12.3). Later on, it gets more
  problematic, when the Westphalian region diverges, but in the eighth/ninth
  centuries there are still common elements in Frisian and Eastphalian. The model is
  flexible.
DE LANGEN The boundaries inland are clear?
VERSLOOT We have very little data.
DE LANGEN I’m particularly interested in the central river area.
VERSLOOT There’s practically nothing there, except very early and difficult runic
  inscriptions (Bergakker and Borgharen: see Looijenga, this vol., Ch. 13), which do
  not contain Anglo-Frisian traces.
DE LANGEN How much data do you really have? When a new find comes, do you
  see new boundaries?
VERSLOOT Not really boundaries, but I’m sure new finds will improve the
  chronology. Much of it is the result of recent scrutiny of the available linguistic and
  onomastic material dating from c. 800 and later, including modern dialects.
MOL Do you distinguish South- and North-Holland?
VERSLOOT No, Holland is taken as one. The boundary between Zeeland and
  Holland is around the Maas.
DE LANGEN But you see Holland as one?
VERSLOOT Yes: it’s just that Frisian disappears from South-Holland much earlier
  than it does from North-Holland. When you take the single relics in place-names,
  though, Holland is nicely in line.
FLIERMAN Is this diagram the totality of changes or a selection?
VERSLOOT No, it’s a representative selection, which concentrates on vowels, which
  are most prominent in historical reconstructions of Germanic languages. There is
  more, but this is the core for the Anglo-Frisian varieties.
LOOIJENGA In runic inscriptions, we have famous instances of the Frisian combs
  with, variously, kabu and kobu. How do you explain that?


                                           365

=== page 366 ===
                           Frisians of the Early Middle Ages

VERSLOOT The development of the a+nasal consonant to o is as a
  gradual/‘reluctant’ change. In Old English too, it is a tendency rather than a full
  change: for example, we have Modern English long but also hang; comb but lamb.
  It’s therefore unproblematic to have both spellings.
LOOIJENGA They’re from very close to each other, with only one river between
  them.
VERSLOOT I don’t think the contrast should be interpreted in terms of a
  dialectal difference; it rather reflects the fact that the phonological status of this
  development was very weak.
LOOIJENGA And the ending -u? How do you explain that?
VERSLOOT I see it as an approximation of a schwa-like sound (cf. Nedoma 2018).
NIJDAM When we move into Old Frisian, there are only a few phonological changes
  that are exclusive to the language, in particular eht-breaking (reht > riucht) and
  w-breaking (singwan > siunga), which are also found in Insular North Frisian.
  There aren’t many distinctive features.
VERSLOOT Indeed; but also the differentiation of ai into ē and ā is important (e.g.
  English toe, stone; Dutch teen, steen; Old Frisian tāne, stēn). Some developments
  differ from Old Saxon and Old English only in the details. It is the total mix of
  features, some shared with Old English, some with Old Saxon, some with Old
  Norse, that characterizes Frisian.
NIJDAM That is my question, based on Roger Lass (1994) etc.: you say riuht appears
  just after 600. I thought it would only be in the late eighth century that it would
  have appeared. But you now see a North Sea Germanic continuum in which
  Frisian is distinct from the seventh century onwards?
VERSLOOT The concept of ‘Frisian’ is imposed from hindsight. I think a Germanic
  speaker of c. 700 would have had difficulty identifying something as ‘Frisian’;
  someone from the northern part of Saxonia would speak a very similar language.
  In hindsight we can see the changes becoming part of a ‘language’. It has to do
  with the family-tree model. With Franconian, there could have been a perceptible
  difference by about 700.
NIJDAM With things like final devoicing and loss of h etc.?
VERSLOOT Final devoicing is typical of Continental Germanic and much later in
  coastal areas – even in the nineteeth/twentieth centuries in Frisian.
NIJDAM Can you give us examples of how Frankish and Frisian differed?
VERSLOOT In all these things (Tab. 12.3), Frankish does not participate. Franconian
  is a very archaic language variant. What we find in Lex Salica is basically proto-
  West Germanic in form. Nothing seems to have happened. That’s also remarkable.
NICOLAY I wonder what you can say about the difference west and east of the
  former Vlie (between present-day Friesland and North-Holland), in relation to
  the habitation hiatus in the fifth century, and the sources of repopulation from the
  south (Frankish area) rather than the east (Anglo-Saxon Germany)? Does this fit
  with your model?
VERSLOOT What perhaps it does is to confirm the idea that the changes took place
  in situ and had nothing to do with where people came from. They came in with
  a quite undifferentiated West Germanic language, and once settled they began to
  participate in a North Sea Germanic configuration. It doesn’t matter where they
  came from. This confirms Kuhn’s idea that the innovations took place during and

                                          366

=== page 367 ===
                                North Sea Germanic Idiom

  after the Migration Period. It’s an interesting oxymoron that immigration seems to
  have involved markedly distinctive groups in the archaeology while the linguistic
  picture is very different: more of a blank slate to start with.
DE LANGEN At the same time, you also stressed that you have a need for a certain
  amount of time for a change. But up to 600 the languages stayed together and then
  diverged. Does that give us enough time?
VERSLOOT Between c. 400 and 600 these languages share a couple of innovations.
DE LANGEN They have to accelerate at a certain stage.
VERSLOOT Basically, yes.
DE LANGEN You also stressed a boundary with the hinterland, which made me
  wonder where the new settlers came from to join in so quickly.
VERSLOOT I don’t really see the problem.
DE LANGEN We have a hinterland which speaks one language, and people join in
  from somewhere.
NICOLAY In the western Netherlands you mean?
DE LANGEN As I read this as an archaeologist, by the fifth century they had already
  joined up. And then they split up. But when did they join up?
VERSLOOT Between 400 and 450 we have the start of settlement in Frisia and
  England, and they were in contact with one another.
DE LANGEN …but not in Holland.
VERSLOOT OK. That means that they would have to catch up in a way, through a
  sort of course of integration.
DE LANGEN But you also need time. And then they split up again. My question is,
  how much time do you need?
VERSLOOT The split-up is not a problem. You need them to stay in contact.
DE LANGEN But when did they join up?
VERSLOOT 400, 450? Up to 500? That’s what I get from the archaeological story.
  Joining up didn’t require them to sit down together. The Anglo-Saxons were
  already in England, and you need North Sea Germanic contact and networks. We
  hear a lot about those. I’m interested also in the sociolinguistic reality of it. It’s true
  that there are rapid changes between 450 and 700, which we see often in languages
  in a dynamic situation. It’s possible for that then to freeze subsequently. It’s not
  a single linear thing. We see the same thing in Frisian in the fifteenth century.
  Around 1400 the language is typologically similar to late Old English; around 1500
  it’s like the modern language.
HINES The answer to the questions on your slide, is that we should wait and see.
  Archaeology is developing very rapidly, and ancient DNA (aDNA) data are now
  becoming available as a source of study on past demography. Advances in stable
  isotope analysis and interpretation are proceeding in an encouraging way too. We
  shall be able to study population mobility much better in the course of the next ten
  to fifteen years, and just for now we have to be patient.
		 Nevertheless, the distributions of artefacts do show connected networks, and
  those networks absolutely presuppose contacts between people. I would draw
  attention to the fact that a concept that quite rapidly came to the fore in historical
  linguistics/language history about twenty years ago was the idea of ‘convergence’
  between languages in contact as a major factor. Languages do not just split and
  diverge but can become more similar too. A more sociolinguistic viewpoint would

                                             367

=== page 368 ===
                          Frisians of the Early Middle Ages

   emphasize that the practical circumstances have to be right for particular modes of
   development to take place: whether that is the movement of people or just contact
   is an interesting point.
FLIERMAN I deal mostly with Latin. Can we postulate the absence or presence of a
   written culture as a major factor? Can a literary tradition affect innovations?
VERSLOOT Written language is definitely a stabilizing factor nowadays. Thus rapid
   changes are more likely to take place in primarily oral language circumstances. We
   don’t really see that stabilizing influence until the modern era.
FLIERMAN So, you wouldn’t use it to compare the less innovative situation in
   Franconia with the north.
VERSLOOT Too little was written in the vernacular in Franconia then to make a
   difference.
KNOL In relation to changes in the fifteenth century, I was expecting something very
   different. In Groningen and Ostfriesland then, Frisian was completely replaced by
   Saxon. Less than a century was required for complete language replacement. You
   could ask the same questions of that situation, but only some can be answered.
   Subsistence and social organization did not change in Groningen then. Frisian
   Freedom remains in Groningen. But the language changed, except for place and
   personal names. This would be a very interesting point of comparison.
VERSLOOT I have given this some thought. I don’t have clear answers yet as to what
   was going on. In light of the Frisian Freedom, external political changes cannot be
   identified as the cause.
KNOL I wasn’t aware of a change in Frisian in Friesland then, although now I hear
   that the Frisian language changed there too.
VERSLOOT It was an internal change, but towards something much closer to Middle
   Dutch in type. There must have been widespread bilingualism, and this explains
   why the cities switched to Dutch. But I don’t think it’s exactly the same. Looking
   at the spread of linguistic innovations or fashions of pronunciation in the Early
   Middle Ages is different from the fifteenth century when it’s a matter of language-
   shift and strong contact situations. I hadn’t though thought about the relationship
   between the internal changes in Frisian and the concurrent language-shift in
   Groningen. The same phenomenon should underlie them.
LOOIJENGA I think the situation involves a lot more than Frisians and Anglo-
   Saxons alone. Britain was not an unpopulated place. There were lots of contacts
   with France/Gaul too. I don’t know what language they would have had. This
   makes the situation very complicated, and that must have sociolinguistic
   consequences too. It could also help explain why it was so innovative, and
   interesting fashions spread.
VERSLOOT Yes, you are right. It’s an interesting consideration; thank you (cf. fn. 13,
   above).
IJSSENNAGGER-VAN DER PLUIJM Does population size matter and can you take
   that into account?
VERSLOOT The smaller the group, the easier it is for changes to spread. There
   are interesting network-model analyses of this: depending on the number of
   participants and the form of the network, changes can spread quickly.
IJSSENNAGGER-VAN DER PLUIJM So, could it be that because the networks were
   originally small, in the early phase, innovations would spread more quickly?

                                         368

=== page 369 ===
                               North Sea Germanic Idiom

VERSLOOT Yes.
DE LANGEN It could also be that they switched language.
VERSLOOT At that time, switching language basically meant switching accent.
NIEUWHOF That answers my question: why was the Frankish language so stable,
  then? It is probably because it was a large population.
VERSLOOT Yes, otherwise we’re talking about a mobile situation with small
  numbers. The comparison with Saxon is important. Old Saxon is the most
  conservative form in the eighth/ninth centuries. In Franconian you do get the High
  German consonant-shift. Saxony remains very stable.
NIEUWHOF …while the fifth-century Frisian area had a new population forming,
  and so was very flexible.

                                      References


                               (including Discussion)

Primary sources
A School Atlas of English History. Ed. Samuel Rawson Gardiner 1907 (London).
Bede, Ecclesiastical History, Volume I: Books 1–3. Trans. J. E. King 1930, Loeb Classical
   Library 246 (Cambridge, MA).
R1 = Rüstringer Recht. Eds. Wybren Jan Buma and Wilhelm Ebel 1963, Das Rüstringer Recht.
   Altfriesische Rechtsquellen. Texte und Übersetzungen 1 (Göttingen).
U = Codex Unia. Ed. Johanneke Sytsema 2012, ‘Diplomatic Edition Codex Unia’ (via http://
   tdb.fryske-akademy.eu/tdb/index-unia-en.html#).
Sweet, Henry and Dorothy Whitelock 1967, Sweet’s Anglo-Saxon Reader in Prose and Verse
   (Oxford).
Valcooch, Dirck Adriaensz 1599, Chronijcke van Leeuwenhorn (Hoorn) (via https://dbnl.
   org/tekst/valc007chro01_01/valc007chro01s_01_0001.php , accessed 22 August 2018).

Secondary sources
Århammar, Nils R. 1968, ‘Die Herkunft des Inselnordfriesischen im Lichte der Wortgeogra-
  phie’, Philologia Frisica anno 1966 (Grins), 49–76.
— 1975, ‘Historisch-soziolinguistische Aspekte der nordfriesischen Mehrsprachigkeit’,
  Zeitschrift für Dialektologie und Linguistik (2), 129–45.
— 1990, ‘Friesisch und Sächsisch. Zur Problematik ihrer gegenseitigen Abgrenzung im
  Früh- und Hochmittelalter’, In Aspects of Old Frisian Philology, eds. R. H. Bremmer, G.
  van der Meer and O. Vries, Amsterdamer Beiträge zur älteren Germanistik 31–32 (Gro-
  ningen–Amsterdam–Atlanta), 1–25.
— 1995, ‘Zur Vor- und Frühgeschichte der Nordfriesen und des Nordfriesischen’, In Frie-
  sische Studien II. Beiträge des Föhrer Symposiums zur Friesischen Philologie vom 7.–8.
  April 1994, eds. Volkert F. Faltings, Alastair G. H. Walker and Ommo Wilts (Odense),
  63–96.
— 2001, ‘Die Herkunft der Nordfriesen und des Nordfriesischen’, In Handbuch des Frie-
  sischen / Handbook of Frisian Studies, ed. Horst Haider Munske (Tübingen), 531–7.
Aufderhaar, Iris 2017, ‘Between Sievern and Gudendorf. Enclosed sites in the north-western

                                           369

=== page 370 ===
                            Frisians of the Early Middle Ages

   Elbe-Weser triangle and their significance in respect of society, communication and
   migration during the Roman Iron Age and Migration Period’. In Frisians and their North
   Sea Neighbours. From the Fifth Century to the Viking Age, eds. J. Hines and N. IJssennag-
   ger (Woodbridge), 149–72.
Bantelmann, Albert, Albert Panten, Rolf Kuschert and Thomas Steensen 1995, Geschichte
   Nordfrieslands (Heide).
Berger, Dieter 1993, Duden: Geographische Namen in Deutschland: Herkunft und Bedeutung
   der Namen, Duden-Taschenbücher 25 (Mannheim–Leipzig–Wien–Zürich).
Blok, D. P. 1968, ‘Plaatsnamen in Westfriesland’, Philologia Frisica anno 1966., 11–19.
Bos, J. M. and E. W. Brouwer 2005, ‘De kruisvormige fibulae van Friesland: een nieuwe
   benadering in het onderzoek naar de herkomst van de eerste migranten vanaf AD
   380/400 en de culturele oriëntatie van het Friese terpengebied tot ca. AD 550’, De Vrije
   Fries 85, 9–36.
Bremmer Jr, Rolf H. 2009, An Introduction to Old Frisian: History, Grammar, Reader, Glos-
   sary (Amsterdam).
Büntgen, Ulf, Vladimir S. Myglan, Fredrik Charpentier Ljungqvist et al. 2016, ‘Cooling and
   societal change during the Late Antique Little Ice Age from 536 to around 660 AD’,
   Nature Geoscience 9 (3), 231–6.
Campbell, Alistair 1959 (2nd edn 1977), Old English Grammar (Oxford).
Chadwick, H. Munro 1889, Studies in Old English (London).
Colleran, Rebecca A. B. 2016, ‘Keeping it in the family; disentangling contact and inher-
   itance in closely related languages’ (Ph.D. thesis, University of Edinburgh) https://era.
   ed.ac.uk/handle/1842/25919
De Vaan, Michiel 2017, The Dawn of Dutch. Language Contact in the Western Low Countries
   before 1200 (Amsterdam).
Deckers, Pieterjan 2017, ‘Cultural convergence in a maritime context’. In Frisians and their
   North Sea Neighbours. From the Fifth Century to the Viking Age, eds. J. Hines and N.
   IJssennagger (Woodbridge), 175–92.
Dodgson, John McN. 1966, ‘The significance of the distribution of the English place-name
   in -ingas, -inga- in south-east England’, Medieval Archaeology, 10, 1–29.
Dörfler, Walter 2003, ‘Rural economy of the Continental Saxons from the Migration Period
   to the tenth century’. In The Continental Saxons from the Migration Period to the Tenth
   Century: An Ethnographic Perspective, eds. Dennis Howard Green and Frank Siegmund,
   Studies in Historical Archaeoethnology (Woodbridge), 133–57.
Euler, Wolfram 2013, Das Westgermanische: von der Herausbildung im 3. bis zur Aufglied-
   erung im 7. Jahrhundert; Analyse und Rekonstruktion (Berlin).
Findell, Martin 2012, Phonological Evidence from the Continental Runic Inscriptions
   (Berlin–Boston).
— 2014, Runes (London).
Gelling, Margaret and Ann Cole 2000, The Landscape of Place-Names (Stamford).
Grimmer, Martin 2007, ‘Britons in early Wessex: The evidence of the Law Code of Ine’. In
   Britons in Anglo-Saxon England, ed. Nick J. Higham, Publications of the Manchester
   Centre for Anglo-Saxon Studies 7 (Woodbridge), 102–14.
Gysseling, Maurits 1962, ‘Het oudste Fries’, It Beaken 24, 1–26.
Haugen, Odd Einar 2004, ‘Frå urnordisk til norrønt språk’. In Handbok i norrøn filologi,
   additional file online (http://folk.uib.no/hnooh/handbok/ekstra/urnordisk.html)
   (Bergen).

                                            370

=== page 371 ===
                                North Sea Germanic Idiom

Higham, Nicholas J. and Martin J. Ryan 2015, The Anglo-Saxon World (New Haven–London).
Hines, John 1995, ‘Focus and boundary in linguistic varieties in the north-west Germanic
   continuum’. In Friesische Studien II. Beiträge des Föhrer Symposiums zur Friesischen Phi-
   lologie vom 7.–8. April 1994, eds. Volkert F. Faltings, Alastair G. H. Walker and Ommo
   Wilts (Odense), 35–62.
— 2017, ‘The Anglo-Frisian question’. In Frisians and their North Sea Neighbours. From the
   Fifth Century to the Viking Age, eds. J. Hines and N. IJssennagger (Woodbridge), 25–42.
Hofmann, Dietrich 1956, ‘Probleme der nordfriesischen Dialektforschung’, Zeitschrift für
   Mundartforschung 24 (2), 78–112.
— 1972, ‘Fries “tiuche”, deutsch “zeche”, griech “dikè” und Verwandte’, Us Wurk 21–2,
   55–80.
Hogg, Richard M. 2011, A grammar of Old English Vol. 1, Phonology (Chichester).
IJssennagger, Nelleke 2012, ‘Vriend, vazal en vijand? Contacten tussen Friezen en Scandina-
   viërs in de Vikingtijd: Teksten en objecten’, De Vrije Fries 92, 37–59.
Kauhanen, Henri 2017, ‘Neutral change’, Journal of Linguistics 53 (2), 327–58.
Kerkhof, Peter Alexander 2018, ‘Language, law and loanwords in early medieval Gaul’
   (Ph.D. thesis, Leiden University).
König, Werner 2001, Dtv-Atlas Deutsche Sprache (München).
Kortlandt, Frederik 1999, ‘The origin of the Old English dialects revisited’, Amsterdamer
   Beiträge zur Älteren Germanistik 51 (Amsterdam), 45–51.
— 2008, ‘Anglo-Frisian’, NOWELE. North-Western European Language Evolution 54/55,
   265–78.
Kuhn, Hans 1955, ‘Zur Gliederung der germanischen Sprachen’, Zeitschrift für deutsches
   Altertum und deutsche Literatur 86, 1–47.
Lass, Roger 1994, Old English. A Historical Linguistic Companion (Cambridge).
Leslie, Stephen, Bruce Winney, Garrett Hellenthal et al. 2015, ‘The fine-scale genetic struc-
   ture of the British population’, Nature 519 (7543), 309–14.
Looijenga, Tineke 2003, Texts and Contexts of the Oldest Runic Inscriptions (Leiden–Boston).
Martin, Toby F. 2015, The Cruciform Brooch and Anglo-Saxon England (Woodbridge).
Meier, Dirk 2003, ‘The North Sea coastal area: Settlement history from Roman to early
   medieval times’. In The Continental Saxons from the Migration Period to the Tenth Cen-
   tury: An Ethnographic Perspective, eds. Dennis Howard Green and Frank Siegmund,
   Studies in Historical Archaeoethnology (Woodbridge), 37–76.
Nedoma, Robert 2018, ‘Voralfriesisch -u im Nominativ und Akkusativ Singular der
   maskulinen a-Stämme’. In Directions for Old Frisian Philology, eds. R. H. Bremmer Jr,
   S. Laker and O. Vries, Amsterdamer Beiträge zur älteren Germanistik 73 (Amsterdam),
   343–68.
Nicolay, Johan A. W. 2005, ‘Nieuwe bewoners van het terpengebied en hun rol bij de opkomst
   van Fries Koningschap. De betekenis van gouden bracteaten en bracteaatachtige hangers
   uit Friesland (vijfde-zevende eeuw na Chr.)’, De Vrije Fries 85, 37–103.
— 2014, The Splendour of Power: Early Medieval Kingship and the Use of Gold and Silver in
   the Southern North Sea Area (5th to 7th century AD), Groningen Archaeological Studies
   28 (Groningen).
— 2017, ‘Power and identity in the southern North Sea area: the Migration and Merovin-
   gian Periods’. In Frisians and their North Sea Neighbours. From the Fifth Century to the
   Viking Age, eds. J. Hines and N. IJssennagger (Woodbridge), 75–92.
Nielsen, Hans Frede 1985, Old English and the Continental Germanic Languages: A Survey of

                                            371

=== page 372 ===
                              Frisians of the Early Middle Ages

    Morphological and Phonological Interrelations, Innsbrucker Beiträge zur Sprachwissen-
    schaft 33, 2nd edition (Innsbruck).
— 1998, The Continental Backgrounds of English and its Insular Development until 1154.
    (Odense–Portland OR)
— 2000, The Early Runic Language of Scandinavia: Studies in Germanic Dialect Geogra-
    phy (Heidelberg).
— 2010, ‘The early runic language of Scandinavia: proto-Norse or north-west Germanic?’
    In Zentrale Probleme bei der Erforschung der älteren Runen: Akten einer internationalen
    Tagung an der Norwegischen Akademie der Wissenschaften, eds. John Ole Askedal, Harald
    Bjorvand, James E. Knirk and Otto Erlend Nordgreen (Frankfurt am Main.), 95–114.
Nieuwhof, Annet 2016, ‘De lege vierde eeuw’. In Van Wierhuizen tot Achlum. Honderd Jaar
    Archeologisch Onderzoek in Terpen en Wierden, ed. A Nieuwhof, Jaarverslagen van de
    Vereniging voor Terpenonderzoek 98 (Groningen), 83–98.
Noomen, Paul N. 2001, ‘Hachens en Wachens. Feit en fiksje yn midsieusk Fryslân’. In Spec-
    ulum Frisicum: Stúdzjes oanbean oan Philippus H. Breuker, eds. Rolf H. Bremmer Jr,
    Lammert G. Jansma and Piet Visser (Leeuwarden–Leiden).
Pheifer, Joseph J. M. D. 1974, Old English Glosses in the Épinal-Erfurt Glossary (Oxford).
Popkema, Anne T. 2013, ‘On the origin of all evil: The Old Frisian collocation grimme herne
    and its modern use’. In Twenty-nine smiles for Alastair: Freundesgabe für Dr. Alastair G.
    H. Walker zu seinem Abschied von der Nordfriesischen Wörterbuchstelle der Christian-Al-
    brechts-Universität zu Kiel am 4. Juli 2013, ed. J. Hoekstra (Kiel–Groningen), 195–207.
Quak, Arend 2016, ‘Urgermanisches e1 im Kontinentalgermanischen’. In From Variation to
    Iconicity (Festschrift for Olga Fischer), eds. A. Bannink and W. Honselaar (Amsterdam),
    311–30.
Salmons, Joseph 2018, A History of German: What the Past Reveals about Today’s Language.
    2nd edition (Oxford).
Schouten, P., J. de Groot, G. Warnars, S. Luchtmans, J. Luchtmans, A. Blusse and P. Blusse
    1785, Tegenwoordige Staat der Vereenigde Nederlanden; dertiende deel; vervattende eenen
    aanvang der beschryving van Friesland (Amsterdam).
Schulte, Michael 2018, Urnordisch: eine Einführung, Wiener Studien zur Skandinavistik 26
    (Wien).
Schwarz, E. 1951, Goten, Nordgermanen, Angelsachsen. Studien zur Ausgliederung der ger-
    manischen Sprachen (Bern–München).
Siebs, Theodor 1889, Zur Geschichte der englisch-friesischen Sprache (Halle an der Saale).
Siegmund, Frank 2003, ‘Social relations among the Old Saxons’. In The Continental Saxons
    from the Migration Period to the Tenth Century: An Ethnographic Perspective, eds. Dennis
    Howard Green and Frank Siegmund, Studies in Historical Archaeoethnology (Wood-
    bridge), 77–95.
Stiles, Patrick 1995, ‘Remarks on the “Anglo-Frisian” thesis’. In Friesische Studien II. Beiträge
    des Föhrer Symposiums zur Friesischen Philologie vom 7.–8. April 1994, eds. Volkert F.
    Faltings, Alastair G. H. Walker and Ommo Wilts (Odense), 177–220.
Stiles, Patrick V. 2013, ‘The pan-West Germanic isoglosses and the subrelationships of West
    Germanic to other branches’, NOWELE. North-Western European Language Evolution
    66 (1), 5–38.
Swarte, Femke, Nanna Haug Hilton and Charlotte Gooskens 2013, ‘Onderlinge verstaan-
    baarheid tussen Noord- en Westerlauwers Fries’, Us Wurk 62 (1–2), 21–46.
Tiefenbach, Heinrich 2010, Altsächsisches Handwörterbuch / A Concise Old Saxon Dictionary

                                              372

=== page 373 ===
                                 North Sea Germanic Idiom

   (Berlin).
Todd, Malcolm 2004, The Early Germans (Malden–Oxford).
Trudgill, Peter 2010, Investigations in Sociohistorical Linguistics: Stories of Colonisation and
   Contact (New York–Cambridge).
Udolph, Jürgen 2006, ‘England und der Kontinent: Ortsnamenparallelen’. In Language and
   Text: Current Perspectives on English and Germanic Historical Linguistics and Philology,
   eds. A. J. Johnston, F. von Mengden and S. Thim (Heidelberg), 317–43.
Van Berkel, Gerald and Kees Samplonius 2018, Nederlandse plaatsnamen verklaard
   (Amstelveen).
Versloot, Arjen Pieter 2011, ‘Frisian place-names and place-names in Friesland’, Onoma 46,
   127–50.
— 2014a, ‘The Runic Frisian vowel system: the earliest history of Frisian and Proto-Insu-
   lar North Frisian’, Amsterdamer Beiträge zur älteren Germanistik 72, 35–62.
—2014b, ‘Die –ar-Plurale im Altwestfriesischen mit einem Exkurs über die sächlichen
   Plurale im Westfriesischen’, Us Wurk 63, 93–114.
— 2017a, ‘Proto-Germanic ai in North and West Germanic’, Folia Linguistica 51 (s38),
   281–324.
—2017b, ‘The Riustring Old Frisian -ar plurals: borrowed or inherited?’. In Frisian
   Through the Ages. Festschrift für Rolf Bremmer, eds. M. de Vaan and S. Laker, Amster-
   damer Beiträge zur älteren Germanistik 77 (Leiden–Boston), 442–56.
—2018, ‘Frysk út Noard-Hollân út de 17e iuw?’, Us Wurk 67, 1–37.
— forthcoming a, ‘Reconstructing the historical phonology of Old English I’, English
   Language and Linguistics.
— forthcoming b, ‘The historical phonology of Old English: a critical review’, Papers in
   Historical Phonology.
Versloot, Arjen Pieter and Elżbieta Adamczyk 2017, ‘Geography and dialects in Old Saxon:
   river-basin communication networks and the distributional patterns of North Sea Ger-
   manic features in Old Saxon’. In Frisians and their North Sea Neighbours. From the Fifth
   Century to the Viking Age, eds. J. Hines and N. IJssennagger (Woodbridge), 125–48.
Versloot, Arjen Pieter and Michiel de Vaan in preparation, A Grammar of Proto-Frisian; the
   Beginnings of the Frisian Language.
Vonderach, Andreas 2015, Anthropologie Europas: Völker, Typen und Gene vom Neander-
   taler bis zur Gegenwart, 2nd edition (Graz).
Vries, Oebele 2007, Asega, is het Dingtijd? De Hoogtepunten van de Oudfriese Tekstoverlev-
   ering (Leeuwarden).




                                              373

=== page 374 ===

